AFRICAN UNION UNION AFRICAINE 
~J~' jb.J~' 
UNI.AO AFRICANA 
AFRlCAN COURT ON HUMAN AND PEOPLES' RlGHTS 
COUR AFRICAi{E DES DROITS DE L'HOMME ET DES PEl[P~ES 
PU H..ix 62i·l l\n1':.ho1, Tani;mtrl leli-pho11c •255 27 105 0111 Fax t255'2~-l205 0112 

. -­
• • ~· 
.. 
IN THE MATTER OF 
MICHELOT YOGOGOMBAYE 
versus 
THE REPUBLIC OF SENEGAL 

APPLICATION..No. 001 /~008 
JUDGMENT 

The Cm.lrt composed of: Mr. MUTSINZI, President; Ms. AKUFf'O, Vice Prl'sident: Ms. MAFOSO-GUNI, Messrs NGOEPE, FANNOUSH, GUINDO, NJYJNGEKO, OUGUERGOUZ and MULENGA -Judges; and Mr. DIAKITE -Registrar 
ln the malt<'r of: 
Mr. Michclot Yogogombayc, 
reprPc;Pnting himself 
uer.i.;11,i.; 
lhc Republic of Senegal, 
repre")f:'ll lecl by: 
Mr Abdoulavc Dianko, Stale Legal Officer. 
Mr Mafall Fall, ~Lale Legal Department.. Ministry of Economy 
and Finance. 
llis ExcelJency Mr. Chcikh Tidiane Thiam, Ambassador, 
Mr. Mamadou Mbodj, Legal and Consular Affairs Department, 
Mi rnsuy of Foreign Affairs, 
Mr .\11oustapha Ka, Cnminal and Mercy Affairs Department, 
Mmislry of Justice, 

After de-liberation on the matter, 
makes 1he fol/owing ruling: 
d;, 
l. By an application dated l l '" August 2008, Mr. Ml'Ct\elo~ Yogogombaye (hereinafter referred to as "the Applicant"), a Chad1an national, born in 1959 and currently residing in 81enne, Switzerland. brought before the Court a case against the RC'pu blic of SC'nrgal (hereinafter refcrrcci Lo a8 "SenegaJ"), "with a view to obtc·nning ~uspcnsion of the ongoing proceedings mstituted by the Republic ctnd StatC' of Senegal \Vith the objective Lo c-h(irgc:, try and sentc'nce Mr. I lisscin Habrc?. former Head of 
~~Cha<!, rrescntz asylumcd in D~kar, ~~ 
? \]:: l L_______./ -I' 

?C. ~­
2 . In accordance \v1th Artidc 22 of the Protocol to the African Charter on I Juman and Pcoplcs1 Rights on lhe Establishment of un Africun Court on I luman and Peoples' Rights (hereinafter referred to as "the Proi ocol"). and Rule 8 (2) of the Interim Rules of Cnurt (hereinafter referred to as "the Rules''), Judge El Hadj Guissc', Member of the Court . and H national of Senegal, recused himseu·. 
3. The Applicant sent his application to the Chairperson of Lhe African Union Commission by electronic mail dated 19Lh August 2008. This application was received in the Court Registry on 29th December 2008. with a covering correspondence from the Legal Counsel of t.hc African Un10n Commission dated 21 si November 2008 
4 'T'hc l~cgislry acknowledged rcccipl of Lhc application, and noLified the Applicant by Jetter dated 2 °d January 2009, that all communications meant for the Courl must be addressed directly to It, at its Seat in Arusha, Tanzania. 
5. In accordance with Rule 34 (6) of the Rules, the Registry ~crved a cop.v of Lhc application on Senegal by reg1stered post on 5111 January 2009; also in accordance with Rule 35 (4) (a) of the Rulcs1 lhc Regislr)' inv1ted Senegal Lo commurucate to it, within 30 days, the names and addresses of its representatives. 
6 . Pursuan1 tn Rule 35 (3) of Lhc Rules, Lhe Registry also informed the Chairper!:>On of the African Union Commission about the app1it;ation by letter of that same date. 
7 The Applicant informed the Registry, by letter dated 3ou1 January 2009 received at the Registrv on 51h February 2009, that he would represent himself in the matter that he had brought 
bcfor<' lh<• Court. ~ 
8. i'knegnl ac-kno1A ll'dgcd n·<·e1111 of the application :d tn1nsmit1 C'd to the Court. thl' nnmcs of its representatives mandr.tl(:cl lo n~p1esc11t ll uc.·forc Lhe Court, by letter of lQth February 2009 received by Lhc l<egislry on the same day, by fax. 
~( 
:i 
.r. 0, 
9. By another faxed letter da ted l 7Lh R'ebruary 2009 received in 
the Registry on the same day, Senegal requested the Court to 
extend the time limit "to enable it to better prepare a reply to the 
applkalion11 

• 
10. By an rndcr dttted 61" March 2009, rhc Court granted the 
request of Scncgnl and extended. up Lo 141h April 2009, the period 
within \·Vh ich to submit its reply to the application. 

J l. A copy of the order was served on the Applicant, and on 
Senegal, bv facsimile lransm.ission dated 7tli March 2009. 

12. Senegal submitted its statement of defence within U1e time limit ind1caLcd in the aforesaid orcier, in which it raised prcliminarv objections regarding 1he jurisdiction of the Court and admissibility of the npplication. and also addressed substantive 
lSSUCS 
13. The Registry served on the Applicant, under covering letter of 
141., Apnl 2009, a cop.v of the statement of defence by Senegal. 

l 4 . The Applicant having fai lC'ci 10 respond to the said statement, the l-<vg1s1 ry by another lettcr dalc:d 19111 June 2009, notified the Appl1c.:ant I.hat if he frulcd to respond within 30 days, Lhe Court would mrnumc thnl he chd nol wr.lnl to present any submission in repl) 10 lhc statement or deft:nce, in accordance ""'ith Rule 52 (5) of lhc Rules. 
15. 
On 291h .July 2009, the Applicant acknowledged receipt of lhe stalcment of defence a nd submi1 ted lhat: "th e afore-mentioned replv did noL in lrod ucc any new clcmC'nl likely lo significantly modi(' the vicwR T expressed in my initial application. I therefore m aintain the said views in their cn11rely, and resubmit myself to the a uthority of the Court.'' 

16. 
In view of U-1c facts, the Court did n ot deem it necessary t~ h old a public hearing and, co:isequen1ly, decided to close the ~as .. for clc11bcr:Jlion. 't/ ,


M~ __.. /"
1 
//~ I ~ ----------t 
'}-L ~ 
17. 
In his applkalion, Lhe Applicant averred, among other things, that ·'the Republic and State of Senegal and the Republic and State of Chad, members of the Africc.m Unjon, are parties lo the Protocol [establishing the African Court on Human and Peoples' Rights! and have, rcsp<'ctively, made the dcclaraLion prescribed in Article 34 (6) acccpling the competence of U1e Court to receive applications submitted by individuals". 

18. 
Wilh regard LO the facls, the Applicant submitted that Hissein Habrc, former President of Chad, is a political refugee in Senegal since December 1990. and that m 2000, he was suspected of complicity in cnmes aga1nst humanity. war crimes and acts of torture in the exercise of his t.lut]c·~ as Ilead of State, an allegation basl·d on the complamts b,v the presumed victims of Chadian origin. 


19.The Applicant further ave;rccl that, by decision of July 2006, the African Union had mandaled Senegal to "consider all aspects and impJ1cations of the I11ssem Habrc cast.· and take all appropriatC:' steps to find a solution: or that failing, come up with an African option to lhc prohle.m posed by Lhc criminal prosecution of th<' forml•r Hcud of State of Chad, Mr. Hissein 1-labn~... " 
20. 
Ife also subn1iLted lhat, on 231d July 2008, the two chambers of Lhc Purl1amcnl of SencgaJ adopted a law amending the ConstilutiDn and '·authorizing retroactive application of its criminal laws. \Vilh a view to trying exclusive!)' and solely Mr. Hissein Habrt". 

21. 
Hc alkg;cd th8t by so do111g, Scncgru violated the "sacrosanct pnnciplC" of non 1ctroacuvity of <..:rimmal law, a principle enshrined not only 111 the Sc"ncgalcsc Const 1l u Lion bul also in Article 7 (2) of the African Charter on Human and Peoples' Rights" to which Senegal is a party. 

22. 
,\cco1ding to lhe Applicant, Lhe action of Senegal also porlraved Lhat country's intention "to use in abusive manner, for po lit 1c;-..d and pecuniary end~. lht' mandate conferred on it by the Afnu:m Union in .Jul.) 2006". Furlher, according to the Applicant, in 1>pt111g for a 1ud1cial solutwn 1Hthc:r than an African solution inspn-cd by African tradition , such HS the use of the "Ubuntu':h-> institution (rcconctJiation through dia1ogt1e, lruth and reparations)~ Se negaJ sought lo use its services a~ Legal agent of the African ~n1on for financial gain. ~ t'1\. /-) 


)~->~ (____/---f 

~ V.-'-' j ~~ 

23. Jn conclusion, the Applicant prayed lhe Court to: 
'' J} Rr.1.le that the appl1carion is admissible; 
2} Declare 1ha1 the appl1cation has the effect of suspending lhe ongoing execution of the July 2U06 Afncan Union's mandate to lhe Republic and State of Senegal, until such time that an African solution is .found to the case of the former Chaclian Head of Staie, Hissein Habre, cun·ently a statulory polit1cal refugee in Dakar in the l(epuhlic and State ofSenegal; 
3) Rule that the Repuhhc and Stale of Senegal l1i1s uiolated several clcwses of the Preamble and the Articles of tile African Charter on ll11rnan and Peoples' Right~; 
4/ R1de that the Republic and State of Senegal hc.18 violated the African Charter on Human uflcl Pc>oples' R7ghts and, 1n particular. the 10 Sepfeml;er 1969 OAU/AU/ Convention Gouen11119 the Specific Aspects of Refugee Problems in Afn'ca, which came mto force on 26 June 1974: 
Sj Ru.le that lhe case is politically motivated and thot the Republic and Stole ofSenegal violated the principle o.f universal jurisdiction in the onyoi119 proceedings instituted iuilh a uiew to 111cl1clllly cwd lry111y Mi . l-f1ssein 1-labre; 
6) RT-'le !hut, in the said procedure insrituted 1Uilh a uiew to indictin{l und lnJ1ng Mr. Hissein 1fal?n:, there 1s poliucal motwation, pecuniary ~ motiuntzon a.nd the abuse of the said pn'nciple ­of umuersul JUnsdiction, applicatwn of which will lJecome, de facto, lucrat1 ue for the respondent (estimated to cost 40 billion CFA F1·ancs). Tr11s cw11w1 but create frecedents in
/\w ~{ 

other African countnes 111 which former IJeads 
ofState would pnss1bly take refuge; 
7) Rule thal the c:hurges brought against Mr. Hissein Habre have been abused and abus1·1Je!y used by I.he Republic and State of Senegul, the Prench Republic and State and the h1.1manitan'an organization, Human Rights Waich (l !RW). particularly in view oflhe media pu /Jlic1ty given to1 and the media hype into which they turned, the c;aid allegarwns; 
8) Rule rhat the smd abuse of ihe principle of unwersal 1unscl7'clion has destabilizing effect for Afnca, that tl could impact negatwely on Ute polit1cal, eC'onom1C, social and cultural cleuelopment oj not only the State ofChad but also all other African Staies, ond on the capCLcity of these Slales to maintain normal inten1.ational relcitions; 
9) Suspend the .hlly 2006 African Union mandate lo Senegal and hence the current proceedings instituted by the l~epublic and Staie uj Senegal with u view lo indicting and eventually rry1ng Mr. 1-hssein Habre; 
10) Order the ~ep1~blir and State of Chad and the Republic and State oj' Senegal to establish a nauonal "T'n.lth, Just1ce1 Reparations and Reconciliation" Commission for Chad, on the South Afhcan model derived from the pl1ilosoph1cu.l concept of ''Ubuntu ·· for all the crimes commilled il'1 Cheu:/ betz.oeen 7962 and 2008. will in 50 cloi11g, resolve in African 1uc.mne1 the provlernntU' case of the former Chudwn J-fC'ud c~f Srute, Hissein /-·Iabre; 
11J Recommencl tha1 other Member Scates of the African Union assisl Chad ancl Senegal in~ estubl7shing and putting in.lo operation the . said "Truth, Justice, Reparations and..--' 
. . Reconciliation" ComT!ssion; ) ~_ 
~~  ~  ~  
c-·(C)  \  ~\  
"JfJf  \  Y,G.  I  _  _)  -?  

12) With regard to costs and expenses, grant 
the Applicant the benefit ofji·ee proceedmgs.,, 
24. 
In its stalcment of defence, Senegal for its part submitted1 inter alia, lhal for the Court Lo be able to deal wilh applications brought b_v individuals. "the respondent State must first have recognized the jurisdicuon of lhC' Court to receive such applications in accordance wiU1 Article 34 (6) of the Protocol establishing lhe Court". 

25. 
Jn Lhis regard, Sent"gaJ "strongly asserted that it did not make any such dccluratrnn accepting the jwisdiction of the African Court on Human and Peoples' J~ights to deal with applications brought by ind iv1d uals~. 


26..\lt<'rnt-aivcly. Scnt>gal averreci thR l the Applicant "was wrong to meddJc in a mnttC'r that is thC' cxclusivt: concern of Senegal, Hisscin Habrc~ and the victims" as pPr the ob11gal'ions arising from the Convention against Tor11irr; and lhat it does not see any "justification for legitimatt: interest on Lhe pcu-L of the Applicant to bring t.he case against tl1c Republic of Senegal". 
27. In adci1Lion. Senegal denied the allegations made by the Applicant in r<'gard to the '·purported violation [by it] of the principle of non-rctroaclivity of crimmal law", and the ''purported violation or r\l'ricHn Union mandaLc" of July 2006. 
28. ln conclusio11, Senegal prnyed lhc Court Lo: 
"On mntters ofprocedure: 
Rule Uwl Senegal has not made a declaration uccepr111g fh<:' jun'sdict1011 of lhe Court lo hear upµlic:ufwns submiftecl by indwiduals,· J.-k 
Huie tlwl lhe Applicun l has no interest lo"!-/ 1nstirwe ll1e appll'cotinn; 
Therefore, declare th~ the application is 
madnussible. 
~/ (~ 7~


/\JI '-~-~ }~

\ 
On the merits: 
Declare and decide rhat the evidence adduced by Mr. Michelot Yogogombaye is baseless and 
in.competent; 
Therefore. strike out the pleas submitted by the Applicant as baseless: 
Nule Uw.t Mr. Nlichelot. Yogogombaye should 
bear the costs incurred by the State of Senegal in regard to the applicalfrm ". 
29. 
In accordance with Rules 39 (1) and 52 (7) of the Rules, the Courl has at I his stage, to first consider the preliminary objections raised by Senegal, starling with lhe objection to the Courfs jurisdiction. 

30. 
Anjck 3 (2) of the Protocol and Rule 26 (2) of the Rules provide that 11 i11 the event or a dii:;pute as to whether the Court bas junsdiction, t11e Court shall decide". 

31. 
To resolve lhis issue, it should be noted that, for the Court to hear a case brought directly by an individual against a State Party, there must be compUance with, inter alia, Article 5 (3) and Article 34 (6) ol.thc Protocol. 

32. 
:\r1 ick 5 (3) prov1des that. 


HThe Court may cnti.Lle relevant Non-R; Governmental Organi:t.ations (NGOs) with , observer status before the Commission and · individuals to inslitu Le cases directly before it, in accordance 'With Arliclc 34 (6) of this 
, . Prolocy · _, ~~
·~_
/v '--,,,., ~--­~. ~ \ . ----f 

"-'W J !~~/ 

33. For its part, Article 34 (6) of the Protocol pro,·idcs that: 
"At the time of ratification of this Protocol or any time thercHfLcr, Lhe State shall make a declaraLion accepting the competence of the Court lo receive cases under Article 5 (3) of this Prowcol. The Court shall not receive any petition under Article 5 (3) involving a Si.ate Party which has not 1r.adc such a declaration". 
34. 
The effect of the foregoing two provisions, read together, is that direct access to the Court by an indiv1dual is subject to the deposit b_v Lhc respondent Slate of a special declaration authorizing such CJ case to be brought before lhe Court. 

35. 
As mentioned earlier, the Applicant in his submjssion averred that "the t<epublic and State of Srncgal o.nd the Republic and State of Chad, bolh members of the African Union, are Parties lo the Protocol and have. respectively, made lhe declaration as per Article 34 (6) of the Protocol accepting the competence of the Court to receive Ca!o>es from individuals". For its part, Senegal in its statement of dcfcncc "scrongly asserted that it did not make any SUC'h declaration accepting Lhc.: jurisdiction or the African Court on Human and PcopleR· Rights to hear applications brought by indtvici uals" 

36. 
ln order to resolve this 1ssuc.:, Lhe Court requested the Chairperson of the African Union Commission, depository of Lhe Protocol, to forward to it a copy of Lhe list of lhe States Parties to the Protocol that have made the declaratjon prescribed by the said Article 34 16) , Under covering le-lter dated 29 June 2009, lhe Legal Cou nR<' I of the :\frican Umon Commrnsion LransrrLitted the list in qUL'stio11, CJ nd the Court found t.hcit Senegal was not on the list of the countries that have made the said declaration. 


37 Cnnscqucntl~. the Court concludes that Senegal has not accepted Lhc JUrisdictJon of the Court lo hear cases instituted dirc.:cLly against the country by indjvid uals or non-governmental!J; 
orgaru.1.a Lrnns.  Jn  th<.:  circumstances,  the  Court  holds  Lhat,  '.;?  
pursuant  10  Article  :34  (n)  of  the  Protocol.  it  does  not  have  
junsd1c:uo11 to h('<1r LhL' applicHl1on.  
~'c  
)  111 ;:-:c.  

38. The Court notes, in this respect, that although presented by Senegal in its wntten statement of dcrence as an objection on the ground of "inadmissibility", its first preliminary objection pertains, in reality, to lack ofjunsdiction by lhe Court. 
39 The Cnurl rur thcr notes Lhal the second sentence of Article 34 
(6) of t.he Protocol pro\'ides that "it ::;hall not receive any petition under 1\rudc S (:1) involving a State Party which has not made SUl h n declaration" (en1phasis added). The \\Tard "receive" should nol however be understood in its literal meaning as referring to "phvs1cally receiving'' nor in ils technical sense as referring to "admiRsibiliti'· It should instead be interpreted in light of the letter and spirit of Rule 34 (6) in its entirety and, in particular, in relation to the expression "declaration accepting Lhe competence of the C<mrt to receive apµbcatwns !emanating from individuals or NGOsl" conta1nccl in LhC' first sentence of this provision. It is evidcnt from this reading t ha1 thr objeclive of Lhe aforementioned Ruk :v1 (6) is to prcscnbe Lhc conditions under which the Court could hear suc:h cases: that is to say, the requirement U1at a special dcclaralion should be deposited by the concerned State Party, ond to scl forth Lhe consequences of Lhe absence of such a deposit by the S1rite concerned. 
40. Since the Court has concluded thaL il does not have j urisd1c-uon to hear Lhe case. it does not deem it necessary to exaniinc Lhe quc·slion or acimissJbility 
41. r:ach of Lhl' parties havmg nu1dc submis~ions regarding costs, the Court will now pronounce on this issue. 
42. In his pleadings, the Apphcant prayed the Court, "with respect to the costs and expenses of Lhc case", to grant him "the benefit of free proceedings". 
43 In its statemt'nt of defr'ncc, Senegal, on the other hand, praye~d
~ 
the Court to ''01·der Mi-. Mkhclot Yogogombayc to bear the cos incurred by the State or Senegal in this case". 
44. The Court noles that Rule 30 or the Rules states thai ''Unless 0Lhcrv.•1se rkc1dl~·c~by the Court, each p~shall bear its own 
costs". ¥ ( ~ ~ p 
11
A~ 
\ -jl
.J-....... 


45 Taking into account a11 Lbc circumstances of this case, the Court is of the view that lhere is no reason for it to depart from the provisions of Rule 30 of its Rules. 
4f>. In vit.·\x. or the foregoing, THl~ COURT, unanimously. 1) !lolds that, in terms or /\rticlc 34 (6) of the Protocol, it has no jurisciicLion to hear the case instituted by Mr. Yogogombaye against Senegal; 2) Orders that each parLy sha11 bear jts own costs. Done al ;\ruslia, this fifteenth clay of December in Lhe year Two Thousand and Nine in F'rench and English, the French text being 
auth{'nl1t . 
Signed: 
-Jean M UTSlNZl, President 

!_6ev:·5 ' -Sophia A. B. :\I, UFFO, Vice Prl's1dcnt -~ 
· ,Ju,tirn1 K. MAFOSO-l;UNI. Judge!}. 
-Bernard M. NGOEPE, ,Judge /? 1, v....u.· 
::'.'li "" ~. '1~f1 
Hamdi Faraj FANNOUSH . Jud~c ~----f 

-Moclibo Tountv GUlNDO, Juduc 
. c\ ... 
I:' 
y •t...-, 
-Gerard NlYUNGEKO, ,Judgc ~ 
-if-r-~ --~ 
-F'atsaJ10UGt.:J,;RGOUZ,Judgc (}==1~ 

(("')( 
-Joseph N. ML'LENGA, Judge 
\ /.tpvv· 
and Aboubakar DI:\KITE. Registrar,.._,......-::;.....· . 
-"11.,,,, 
In accordance \Vilh Article 28 (7) of Lhe Protoco1 and Rule 60 (5) of the Rules of Court. the scparalc opinion of Judge Fatsah OUGUERCOUZ 1s appended Lo this Juctgment. 
./:\ 
I 1 
.-
,,L. 
SEPARATE OPINION OF JUDGE FATSAH OUGUERGOUZ 
I. r am in agrcemt:nt with the views of my colleagues in regard to the conclusions reached by the Court on the question of its jurisdiction and on that of the costs and expenses of the case, and consequently I have voted in favor of Lhe said conclusions. However, I belit:ve that these two issues deserved lO be developed in 8 more comprehensive manner. 
2. 
The Applicant indeed has the right to know why it has taken nearly one year between the date of receipt of his application at the Registry and the date on which the Court took its decision thereon. Senegal, on the other hand, has the right to know why the Coun chose to make a soll!mn ruling on the application by means of a Juc.Jgment, rather than reject it de piano with a simple letter issued by the Registry. The two Parties aJso have the right lo know the reasons for which their prayers in respect of the costs and expenses, respectively, or the case, have been rejected; the Applicant should also know why his prayer in this regard was addressed on the basis of Rule 30 of the Interim Rules of the Court (hereinafter referred co as Lhe "Ruks") on Legal Costs, whereas the Court could have equally. if nol exclusively, treated this f)rayer on tht! basis of Rule 31 on Legal Assistance. 

3. 
However, only the ql1estion of 1he jurisdiction of the Court seems to me to be sufficiently viral, to kad me to uppend to the Judgment, an expose of my separate opinion in regard to the manner in which this question should havc·been treated b) the Court. 

4. 
In the present case. the question of the jurisdiction of the Court is relatively simple. It is that of the Coun's "personal jurisdiction" er '1u risdiction rarione personae" in respect of' applications brought by individuals. This is governed by Article 5 (3) of the Protocol to the African Charter on Human and Peoples' Rights on the Establishment of an African Court on Human and Peoples' Rights (hereinafter referred LO as "Prolocol") and Article 34 (6) of the sa id Protoco l which set forth tht! modalities by which a Stace shall accept the said jurisdiction. 

5. 
However, paragraph 31 of the Judgment states, nol without ambiguity, that for !he Court to hear a case brought directly by an individual against a State Party, there must be compliance with, inter alia, Article 5 (3) and Article 34 (6) of the Protocol. 

6. 
If lhe only issue referred to here is thal of rhe jurisdiction of the Court, tht:n the expression "mter alia'' introduces confusion because it lends itself to the understanding that the said jurisdiction is predicated on one or several otht!r conditions that have not been spe lt out. However. in my view, there arc no other conditions to the jurisdiction of the Court 111 the case than that which has b~en)Pecified in Article 34 (6) or the Protocol. reference to which was made in Article 5 (3)« 

7. 
Nevertheless, if lhe expn:ssion "1111er alia" also refers to the condiLions for admissibility of the application. there wou ld no longer be any logical linkage between paragraph 31 and paragraph 29 of the Judgml!nt in which the Court indicated that it would start by considering the question of its jurisdiction. It would be particularly difficult lo understand the meaning orparagraph 39 in which the Court gives its interpretation of the word ·'receive" as used in Article 34 (6) of the Protocol. In paragraph 39. the Court indeed points out that the word ·'receive" as applied to the application should not be understood in its literal meaning as referring to '·physically receiving" nor in its technical sense as referring to "admissibility"; rather it refers to the 'jurisdiction" of the Court to ''examine·· the application: that is to say, its jurisdiction to hear the case. as it states very clearly in paragraph 37 infine ofthe Judgment. 

8. 
Read in light of paragraph 39 of the Judgment. paragraph 31 should therefore be interpreted as reforring exclusively to the question of the Court's jurisdi'ction. 'lincc chc meaning of thl! expression "inter alia" is unckar, the Court had better tlo away with it. 

9. 
Even if the expression is removed there from, paragraph 3 I of the .ludgment, and also paragraph 34 thereof, pose the question oftht! Court'sjurisdkti on in terms that do not faithfully reflect the Court's liberal approach to lhe treatment of the application. 


. .. 
I0. In the foregoing two paragraphs of' rhe Judgment, the question of the Court's jurisdiction is indeed posed by the exclusive reference to Article 5 (3) and Arcicle 34 (6) of the Protocol. However, Article 5 essentially deals with the question of'·Access to the Court" as the title clearly indicates. Thus, the question of the personal jurisdiction of rbe Coun in this case cannot but receive the response set forth in paragraph 37 of the Judgment, i.e., that since Senegal has not made the declaration provided for in Article 34 (6) of the Protocol, the Court has no jurisdiction co hear cases instituted directly against lh_is State by individual5. This ruling could have been made expeditiously in terms of the p~eliminary consideration of th~ Court's jurisdiction as provided for in Ruic 39 orthe Rules. 
I I. Though of fundamental imponancc to the question of che personal jurisdiction of the Court. Article 5 (3) and Article 34 (6) of the Protocol should b<.: read in their context. i.e. in particular in light ofArticle 3 of the Protocol entitled "Jurisdiction" of the Court 
12. Indeed, although Lhe two are closely relaled, the issues of the Court's ''jurisdiction" and of "access" to the Court are no less distinct. as paragraph 39 of the Jlldgment in fact suggests 1; iL is precisely thi s distinction that explains why the Court did not reject de piano the application given the manifest lack of jurisdiction, by means of a simple letter issued by the Registry, and why it took time to rule on the app~ication by means or a very solemn Judgment. 
1 On Lhb poinl. see ror exumph:, Prosper Weal '"ho notes DS lollows "jurbd1c:Lton and scl7.llrc urc not onl)' dis11nct, conceptually; thc:y are separate 1n time, Normally, juristlic1io11 precceds seizure I J. In cc:rtain ~uses, however, the seciucnce muy be reversed", {Tmnslation by the Rc:gi:;IJ")'J "Comp~tenc: et su1smc un nouvel asp.:c1 du pnnc1pe tie In j11ndi .. 1i11n conscnsuellc", In Jerzy Mukurczyl.. (cu.). Theory of Jntunallonat I.ow at the Threshold of /lie list Century -£.!says In Honour efKr=YS::tofSk11b1s=ewski, Kluwer Lllw In Lem~ rhe Ilugue/London/Doston, 1996, p 839 
13. The application was received at the Courl Registry on 29 December 2008 and iL was placed on the general list as No. 001/2008. The application wa~ served on Senegal on 5 January 2009; and on the same day, lhc Chairperson of the African Union Commission was informed about the filing of the application and through him the Exc.:cutivc Council and the other Parties 
lo the Protocol. 
14. Thus, upon submission, the application was subject to a number of procedural acts 
including its registration on the general list of the Court2 and its service on Senegal. 
15. for their part, applications or commun1ca1ions addressed to tht: African Commission on Human and Peoples' Rights3• the defunct European Commission of Human Rights", the Inter-American Commission of I lurnan Rights\ the United Nations Human Rights Committee" 
: The rcg1stnuion of an upplication or communicA!lon on the gem:ral I 1s1 of a Judicial or quusl-Ju<Jiclul organ may be defined os un "act of recognition which establishes that such o Ct•mmw1icat1on is indeed 11 !lt:izure and. us of the dute of reccirt, 11ctualizes the imruducllon of Lhe case", ITrunslation by t.1e Rc:g1stry I Carlo Santulli, Droir du c<mtttnt1tt1.• 1111ernul10na/, LGDJ-Montchrestien, Paris, 2005. p 400 
l Ruic 102 or lhe Ruh:s ol' Procedure ol lhe Afncan Commission. tl.\ 11tlopled on 6 Octobc:r 191/5, IS wonle<l 11s follol'ls "Pursuam to these Rules of Procedure. the Secn:lllry shull trnnsm11 to the Comm1ss1011 the commun1ca11ons $Ubm1t1ed lO htm for considemlion by the Commission m nccordnnce with lhc Charter 2. No communications concemma a State which is not !! pam to Lhe Chaner shall he received by the Comm1ss100 or placed 1n n list under Ruic: I03 ol rhe nresen! Rules" [emphasis 11ddctl), see hrtp'//www.•1chDr.org/lrnnc111s /Info/rules fr.html (site consultetl on 9 December 2009) When member '>tJte~ 1lf the African Union had not all become parties to the Afncan Chaner, anti the Commission received ii commumca11on agumst a Statt: that wtis not n party to the Chaner, the. Commission limited i~dflo writing to the Applicant infom1l11g him/her that it has no junsdiction to deal with the communicauon. It did not serve the communic<ition on the Sulit! concerned, Evelyn A /\nkumah, The African Com1111~·s1011 011 1!1111w11 a11d Puoplt!s Rights Prac11c:e and Procedures, Mruim us Nijhoff Puhlishers. The Hague/London/Boston, 1996, p. 57 
• "When W1 application is Ried by simple let1er. even where such applicnllon is complete, the prncucc of 1he Commission 1s to address an apphcallon form to the Applicarlt I he various points detailed m this form facilitule el'lectivc consideration of 1he admissibility of the uppllcution The Applicunt 1s requested to return thi5 fonn duly completed and :iccompnnietl wuh the requisite: an nexes. The onswer11 10 some of lhe points could mention tht: elements already conwine<l [n the upplicutmn. As o gent:rnl rule (except in case of emcrge11cy), 1t 1s onlv aller lhe rcceiot of !.he duly complet.ed form thllt the iloplicatjon is ~tc:red on the Comm1ss1on's list and given a >enal numbi:r [, , I, II 1s s111d tbnt lhc entry on lhc: list transtonns n "peutlon" into on uppliCllliun in t.t:m1s uf Article 25 oJ U1e Convention· (emphasb udded) Micht:l Melchior, c1 La procedun: devunt la Comrn1ss1on europcenne des droits de: l'Homme » M1cht:I f\lel ch1or (und others), /ntrod11ire 11n reco11rs a Strasbourg' Een Zaak Aanhcmg1g Makt!n te Straast.fburg7 Nemesis EdiliOl15, nrussds, 1986, p.2.J. 
' The jurisdiction of' Lhc Loter-American Commission In n:gnnl to communicnt1ons from md1v1<luab now hes ns of right in regard to ell member States or the Organi:£.allon of Americnn States 1m:spec11ve of whether nr not they nre parues tu the American Convention on Hurnnn Rights, see Rules 27, 49 .ind 50 of' Lhc Rules of Procedure of the Commission is amended in July 2008, Ruic 26 of the Rule~ howi::vc:r provides tor lt1 initial procedural swge that cun be equated to the stnge ur l)Onsiderution or pr1ma fac1e ndm1ssibllity uf the applicutio:i, It Is described by u.n QUthor m the following h:nn:; "the Comm1ss1on receives the peutlon und registers 11. In pracuce, 1t 1s the responsibilil)' of the Executlve Secretarial of the Commission to nscertoin whether the pelllion ls admissible pnma Jane. II so, it regis1en; the petition und opens a file: I I If 1he correc1 fomial has nol been followed, (itJ may request the peuuoner to correct any defic1enc1es" Ludovic I lcnnebcl, L" Convention amencwne des droits de / 'hnmmt! -Meca111smes de prorec11on t!I lite11due d1t.r clrollJ r!/ liberrJs. Bru;.ilant, Bruxelles 2007, p. 163 
h The UN Secretary General main1runs on a permanent basis ii register of the commumcauons that he submil.!. tu the: Commith:e , however, under no circumstonce cun he <lntcr in lhi;: rcg1sccr a communication made egulns1 a State lhe1 1s not :i part) 10 !he Oplional Protocol to the lntemat.lonal Covenant on Civil and Poliucal Rights, see Rules 84 and 85 of the Rules of Procedure of the llumun R1ght.5 Commitlt:e, Un1ted Nations Doc, CCPR/C/3/Rev 7, 4 August 2004. see bup~/www.unbchr,ch/Lb$/doc.osf(Symbol)/CC'flR..C.3 Rev 7.fr> Opcndocumc:nt (sue c0osuhed on 9 December 2009) Whc:n he receives such communication, lhe Secretary General limits himself 10 informing Its author tha1 the: communicution connot be received owing to the: fact lhat the State against which It wa.~ lnsti1u1e~ is not o pany 10 1hc Or1iMal Prol<><:11I M•m l'rcd l'owuK, 11 N Covcna111 on C1wl and fo/111<:11/ Rights CCPR Commentary. 2nd Revised Edition, N.P Engel Publisher. Kehl nm Rhem, 2005, pp.824-825. ~ 
or the International Court of Justice. for example7, undergo a process or \ertmg prior to being regi stered or served on the States against which they were instituted. 
16. 
In this case, the application did not go through this initial procedural phase of veiling. It was treated in the same way as the applications brought before the International Court ot Justice before 0 l July 1978. date of entry into force of its new Rules". Prior to that date, all cases brought before the Court, including those in!>1iluted against States that had not previously accepted the Court's jurisdiction by making the option1:1I declaration accepting the compulsory jurisdiction provided for in Article 36 (2) of the Statute, were indeed placed on the general list and served on the States against which they were instituted. and on the United Nations Secretary General and, through him, on all the other members of the Organization. 

17. 
As indicated in the foregoing paragraph 13, procedural acts similar to the aforesaid were undertaken ia connection with Mr. Yogogornbayc's application; this was, inrer alia, served on Senegal under covering letter datl!d 5 fanuary 2009 

18. 
Senegal acknowledged receipt thereof by letter dated I 0 February 2009 in which it also cransmined the names of those to represent it berore the Court. At thac stage, Senegal could have limited itself lo indicating that it had not made the declaration provided for in Article 34 


(6) of the Protocol and that, consequenlly, the Court had no jurisdiction to deal with the application on the grounds of the provisions of Article 5 (3) of the Protocol. However, by notifying the Court of the names of its represcntativt!s, it gave room for the suggestion that it did not exclude appearing before the Cou1i and of participating in its proceedings, with doubts as to the object of its participation: lo contest the Courrs jurisdiction, contest the admissibility of the application or to defenJ itc;elf on the ml!rits of the case. 
19. By a second letter dated 17 February 2009, Senegal requested the Court to extend the time limit for submission or its observations to "enable ii to berter prepare a reply to the application" By so doing, Senegal signaled its intention to comply with the provisions of Rule 37 of the Rules according to which "the State Party against which un application has been tiled shal I respond thereto with in sixty (60) days provided that the Cou~ may, if the need arises, grant an e>.tension of lime•·. Even in this lener, Senegal did not exclude the eventual acceptance of the Court's jurisdiction. Still at this stage, it could have put up the argument that it has not made the declaration provided for in Article 34 (6) of the Protocol and, on that ground, contested the jurisdiction of the Court. 
' 1L should be mentioned that the: refi:rence to the practice of the European Court of Human R1ghis and the lnter-Amc:ncan Coun of Human R1gh1S 1s of limllcd mlercst in lhis regard, given Lhnt the question of person:ll jLmsd1ct1on is posc<l in different leans before th.:se two Courts. In the Inter-American Court, ind1V1duols havmg no direct access to the Coun the question ol personal JUlisdicuon indeed arises only m regard 10 State Panics; in the EurnpeiJn Court where 1ndlv1duals hove direct access Lo the Court. n hus au1omntli.: Jurisdiction solely on the: ~round of lhc pnru1:1p111inn oJ the member Stutes of the Council of Europe 1n lhe European Convention on Hum1m Rights. 
Ruh: 38. paragraph S, or the cum:nt Rules of Procedure of the lntemallonal Coun of Jusuce states that: "When the Applicant Stale: propusc:s to found the Jur1sdicllo11 of the Cnur upon u conse11t Lhcreto ye t to be given or mani festc:d by the Stute ag111nst which such uppllc:uion is mod~. lhc npphcauon shall be trnnsmincd 10 1ha1 <;1u1c il.....ahAJl 1'm ho»CYA• I» 11111crcd 111 thL Ocucrnl l.t>sl. our uoy dr;!ll)n by mkc:n in !he proceedings. unle~s and until the State ngainSJ which such apghcation is mode consents to die Court's Jurisdiction for the oumoses ofthe casc" (emphasls added) 
20. Even Lhough 11 would not have made the aforementioned declaration. Senegal, by its attitude, left open the possibility. however slim, that it might accept the jurisdiction ofthe Court to deal with the application. 
* 
2 J The fundament:il principle regarding the . acceptance of the jurisdiction of an internalional Court is indeed that of const:nl. a principle which itself is derived from that of the sovereignty of the State. A State's consent is the condition sine qua non for the jurisdiction of any international Court9, irrcspectivt: of the moment or the way 1he consent is expressed10 . 
22. 
This principle of jurisdiction by consent is also upheld by the Protocol. Thus. in contentious matters, the Court can exercise jurisdiction only in respect of the States Parties to the Protoco l. The scope of the Court's jurisdiction in such cases and the modalities of access thereto are defined in Articles 3 and 5, respectively, of the Protocol. 

23. 
By becoming Parties to the Protocol, member Scates of the African Union ipso facto accept the jurisdiction of the Court to entertain applications from other States Parties, the African Commission or African Inter-governmental Organizations. The jurisdiction of the Court in respect of applications from individuals or Non-Governmental OrganizaLions against States Parties is not, for its part, automatic; it depends on the optional expression of consent by Lhe States concerned. 

24. 
This i~ provided for in Article 34(6) of Lhe ProLocol which states that: 


"At the time of raLificat1on of this Protocol or any time thereafter, Lhe State shall make a declaraLion accepting the compecence of the Court LO receive cases under Article 5 
(3) of this Protocol. The Court shall not receive any petition under Article 5 (3) involving a State Party which has not made such a declaraLion". 
As il is drafted, this provision raises two questions: 
25. 
The first is rhe meaning to give to the word •·shall" used in Lhe first sentence which suggests that filing or the declaration by che State Party is an '·obligation·· for the State Party and not simply •·a matter of choice''. 

26. 
Understood in this way, Article 34 (6) would make it obligatory for State Partit!s to make such a declaration after depositing their instruments of ratification (or accession) 11. This prescription does not however have any real legal effect·because it does not set any time limil. 


4 ·•1t tS a wc:ll eslablbhed principle 1n lntemnuonal Low that no St11tc can be compelled w submit Its dispute~ wfth otht:r Stale~ lo mediatJon, arbhraLinn or to any mtlhod of pc:uceful solution w1thou1 its consent", Pc:rmanen1 Court of lntcmouonttl JUSlJcc, Statute ofEastern Carel1a, Advisory Opinion of23 July I 913, Series 8, p.17 
10 "Sui;h consent may be given once and for oil in the fonn of a frei:I}' uccep1ed obligallon ii may however be given In u specilic case beyond any prc-exisling obligation" 1d 
11 Parogruph 6 of the English veision, unlike the French, pmvu.Jc<i that the 1.h:cl1:1rJllOn may be freely m:iJe nn twu diffcrcn1 occu:.lons ·111 the time pi the rntific:ntlon 01 this Protocol or unv Ume t!Jcreallcr" (emphasis added), the Arnll and Portuguese versions ofthe said Paragraph 6 are Identical to lhi: Engl tsh~ 
It also does not make much seni;e when read in lighL of iLs context and particularly or Arlie le 5 
(3) and the second sentence of 34 (6) which states that "The Court shall not receive any petition under Anicle 5 (3) involving a State Pan.y which has not made such a declaration". It can thus be said in conclusion that the filing of the declaration is optional; this conclusion 1s corroborated by an analysis ofrhe "travaux preparatoires" of the Protocol.12 
27. 
The second question raised in Artkle 34 (6) is that of whether lhe filing of the optional declaration by States Parties is the only means of expressing their recognition of the jurisdiction ofthe Court to d~al with applications brought against them by individuals. 

28. 
In this regard, it should first be noted that Arricle 34 (6) does not require that the filing of the optional declaration be done "before" the filing of the application; it simply provides that the declaration may be made "at the time or ratification or any time thereaner". Nothing therefore prevents a State Party from making the declaration "after'' an application has been introduced against iL In accordance \.<vith Article 34 (4) or the Protocol, the declaration. just as ratificarion or accession. enters into force from the Lime of submission and takes effect from this date. Senegal was therefore free LO mal.e such a declaration after the application was introduced. 

29. 
If a Stnte can accept the jurisdiction of the Court by filing an optional declaration ..at any time", nothing in the Protocol prevents it from granting its consent. after the introduction or the application, in a manner other than through the optional declaration. 13 

30. 
Therefore. the second sentence of Article 3-l (6) must not, as the first sentence, be interpreted literally. It must be read in light of the object and purpose or Lhc Protocol and, in parcicular, in light of Article 3 entitled "J urisdiction'' oflhe Court. Indeed, Article 3 provides in general manner that: '·the jurisdiction of the Coun shall extend 10 all cases and disputes submitted to it''; it also provides that "in the event of dispute as to whether the Court has jurisdiction, the Court shall decide'·. It tht:refore lies with the Court to determine in all sovereignty the conditions for the validity of its seizure; and do so only in the light or the principle ofconsent. 


u Sec Article 6 ( l) (Special jurisdiction) of the Cape Town dran (September 1995), Drafi Prowcol t<J the ljrican Charter on Human and Peoples ' Rights 011 1he establishment ofan Ajricun Court cm Human and Peoples' Rights, Government Legnl Experts Meeting on the estoblishmeni of an A fncan Coun on Humun nnd Peoples' Rights, 6-12 September 1995, Cape Town, South Africa, Doc. OAU/LEGfEXP/AfC/Hl'RIPRO (1) Re' I, Anicle 6 (I), of the Nouakchott Draft (Apnl 1997). 
Drufi (Nouakchrm) Protocol to the African Chartt!r on /111man and Peoples ' Rights, on the 1mab//shmem ofWI ttfrican Cour1 011 Hiiman and PeopleJ Rights, Second Government legal Expc:ns Mce1mg on the establishment of on Afrlcon Court on Human ant.I Peoples' Rights. 11-14 April 1997, Nouukchou. M11urltan1n. Doc. OAU/LEG/EXP/AFCllPR/J>ROT (2), pnragrophs 21 , 23, 2.J and 25 of 1hc Rcpon of this Second Expt!11s Metting Report Second Gowtrnment ugal Experls Mei!t111g on llt<' l!Stabl/shmtml 0/011 tJjric:a11 Court on Human and Peoples R1glul, 11-14 April 1997, Nou•1kchott, Maurfwnia, Doc OA U/liXP/JU R/C/\FDHP/RAP (2), Art1clti 34 (6) or lhe Addis Ababu Drnfl (December 1997). Draft Pro1ocol 10 the A/neon Charter on Human and Peoples · Rights 011 1111! t!Stabfiy/iment of tl/1 African Court on Human and Ptop/eJ · Rlght.r. Third Government Experts MeetIn& (including D1plom111S) on the e~1ubtishment of an Afncan Coun un 1lumnn und Peoples' Rights, 8113 December 1997, Addis Ababu. F1hiop1a, !Joo OAU/LEG/CXPIAFCHPR/PRO (111) and parugmph 35 of1he report of this fhircl Meeting of Expc:ns, Report 7711rd Government legal fa:pem Meeting /nc/11dlng D1p/0111au 011 thl! es1abflshment of cm llfr1can Court on Human and Peopl11s Rights, 8111 December 1997, Addis Ababa, Ethiopia, Doo. O/\U/LEG/EXP/AFCHPRIRPT (111). Rev. I. 
11 Such 11 posstbi lity is lur lrununcc cu.J1fiod umlu1 Arnele 02, paragraph 3, oJ the Amencan Conve1111on un l luman Rights as well ns in Article 48 ofthe European Convention on Huphls before the Convention was amc:nded by Protocol 11 
31 Consent by a Slate Part) is the only condition for the Court to exercise jurisdiction with regard to applications brought by individuals. This consent may be expressed before the filing of an application against the State Party. with the submission of the declaration mentioned in Article 3-1 (6) of the Protocol. It may also be expressed later. either formally chrough the filing of such a declaration, or informally or implicitly through jorum prorogalllm. 14 
32. 
Fon1m prorogalum or "prorogacion or competence" may be understood as the acceptance of the j urisdiction of an international Court by a State after the seizure of this Court by another State or an individual, and this either, expressly or tacitly, through decisive acts or an unequivocal bchavior. 15 ll was in particular this possibility that the letters issued by Senegal dated I0 and 17 of February 2009 led the Court to foresee in this case 

33. 
Up to 9 April 2009, the date on which the Registry received the written observations of Senegal, th!.!re was the possibility that Senegal might accept the jurisdiction of the Court. It was onl> on this date that it became unequivocally clear that Senegal had no intt!ntion of accepting che Court'sjurisdiction LO deal with the application. 

34. 
It was therefore up to the Court to take into account Senegal's refusal to consent to the jurisdiction of the Court to deal with the application and to draw the consequences thereof by punJng an end to the matter and removing the case from the general list. 

35. 
Under the former Rules or the International Court of Justice (before 0 I July 1978). when a case was brought against a State which hus not previously accepted the j urisdiction of the Court by filing the optional declaration and such a Stnl e did not accept Lhe Court'~ jurisdiction in regard lo the case after having been invited to do so by the Applicant State, such a case was closed by the issuance of u succ inct order.16 In the Europe'an Court of Human Rights where the problem of jurisdiction occur~ less frequently than Lhat of admissibility of applications. when there is no serious doubt as to the inadmissibility of an application, the corresponding decision is notified to the applicant through a simple letter. 17 


14 "Nonnully junsd1c11un pn:cc:dcs seizure. (.. J In somo Cilscs, howeve r. lhe ~equence moy he ~versed Such IS Lhc cs~cnce uf 1he lhcory offorum proroga111m :iccordmg 10 which lhc roun ma) huvc been properly sei1cJ uf 11n application wht!reus 1ls Jurisd1cuon may nol hnve existed al lhe lime the applicullon was ntccl antl muy only have been assumed subsequently bcca~ Oftilt! consent or1he dc:fendant", Prosper Weil. op "' . p 839 [Translauon by the Rcg1stryJ 
n "Forum prorogmum . Laun expression usunll) tran:.lated by the cxpn:ssion "prorogolcd Jurisdlcuon" Accep1110ce by a Stn1c of the 1urisdict1on of an international jud1c1al body. such us the lntemutionul Cou1 
of Justice. ulter u matter hus bc:c:n referred thc:relo. either by an e)(press declaration to that cffc:tt.. or by 11 decisive acl implying lllcit 11ccepu1nce. The decisive acis may eunsist in effective participation in the proceedings, either by pleading on the mems, or by making tlndings on the meri1s or 11ny other acl implying lack ofob;cclion aga1ns111ny future clt:c1s1on on lhc mcriLS In the: opinwn of the lntemauonal Coun of Justice. such conduct can be tantamount lo tucll .iccepurnce ol Its junsdic11on1 which cannot subsequently be rcvokc:J, by virtue of the bonafidt! or cstoppcl principle. Jcun S:ilnaon (l:d) op c11. p. 5 18. On 1his doctrine. sec Mohammed BedJllOUJ & Fatsnh Ouguc:rgouz, "Le forum prorogatum deva111 la Cour ln/ernntlonal de J11st1ce /es reso11rc11.1 d ·11ne /ns1i1111lon 011 /a /aCI! cachee du con.rensua//sme» in A.frican >earbook o/lt11erna11ona/ Law 1998, Vol. V. pp. 91-11 ;I 
10 See for example, ..Trefilmcnl in llungary of Aircraft und Cn: w of the Unllcd SIJ!lcs of Arnericu". Order or 12 Julv 1954 /C.J Repor1 !95./, p 100 or"Aenal lnc1den1 of7 October 195.:!", Order or 14 March 1956, /.C.J R<!port 1·956, p 10. . 
" l'.:rsonul J11rlst111;Clun ufLhc: l!urupcun t.oun in mutters ol md1v1tluul cummunic:u11ons 1~ mJeed automauc; the: Coun ITILl!ol therefore lirsl deol wilh Jhe ISS1JC or admtss1billl)•or opplic11Lio1~ and. in U1is n:specl Article 53 of I~ Interim Rules, enllllcd 
~ 
36. 
Jn lhe present case. Senegal having formally raised preliminary objections in iU> "statement of defense"18 dated 9 April 2009, the Court deemed it necessary Lo comply wiLh the provisions of Rule 52 (7) of its Rules which stipulates thal '·The Court shall give reasons for its ruling on the preliminarJ objection"19• [Ed. Note: The expression "arret motive'' in French appears as ·1nding" in the English version of Rule 52 (7) of the Rules]. 

37. 
Howevt!r, consideration by the Court of Senegal's preliminary objections, in a judgment, required that it addresses chc question of it's jurisdiction in a more comprehensive manner by developing in particular the possibility of a forum prorogarum. This possibility is al I the more suggested in paragraph 3 7 of the Judgment where the Court, on Lhe grounds of its ruling that Senegal has not made the optional declaration, concluded that the said State. on that basis, "has not accepted the jurisdiction nf the Court to hear cases instituted directly against the Country by individuals or non governmental organizations''. [Ed. Note: The expression •·sur celfe base" in French does not appear in the English version of paragraph 3 7 of the Judgmenl j 

38. 
Nevertheless, il is lhis possibility ofafon1m prorogatum. however slight, that explains why the app lication of Mr. Yogogombaye was not reje~ted right after I 0 February 2009; and it is the filing of preliminary objections by Senegal which explains why the Court did not close the case in a less solemn manner by issuing an order or by simple leuer by lhe Registry. 

39. 
The submission of preliminary objections by Senegal may. in turn. be explained by scrupulous compliance by this Stace with the provisions of Rule 37 and 52 (I) of the Rules. 


* * 

40. Today, the question is whether "all" applications filed with the Registry should be placed on lhe Court's general list, notified to the States against which they are directed, and above all, as provided for under Article 35 (3) of the Rules, notified to the Chairperson of the African Union Commission and, through him, to the Executive Council of Lhe Union, as well as to all the other Stares Parties to the Protocol. As a judicial organ. once the Coun receives an application, iL hus the obligation to ensure, at lt:ast in a prima facie manner, that it has 
"Proceedings before .1 Committee"', provides 1n its pur.ugrnph 2 tbut "in accordance with Artlch: 28 of the Convcnuon, the Committee may. unon1mously, declurc an application to be m~dm1ssibh: or c;tril..c 11 off tht: cause list, \.\TIC!l such a llecision can be madcw1thou1 ony funh.:r exmnma11on. I ha decision shull be nnnl and shall be broue:ht to the ouention of the aoplican! ~·· (cmph1lSls added). 
11 
Exprt:ss1on used m the tcstimon1um cluu::.e on pag..: 17 of Sencgol 's w111en nbserwtions. 
1' The reference to An1clc 39 of the Rules m Pttrugraph 29 of lht Judgmc:nt is not timely us this provision t:oncems preliminary cxsmination by lhe Coun of Its jurisdiction, 1.c 11 suge of the proceedings durin~ which 1t mus1 ensure thul 11 has 111 least primu fac·n• Junsdicuon to entert111n an opplicauon At Lhe stag<! of exumining o prclimlnnl')I ot>je~tinn li>r Ind• ,,r jurisdic1inn the Cuun mllll mulu: QJ.>1Tn111vc rulmg on llS Jlll'IStlicliun 
¥ 

jurisdiction in rhe maner20• Certainly. here lies Lhe object of preliminary consideration by the Court of its jurisdiction as provided for in Rule 39 of its Rules. A selection should then be made between individual applications in respect of which, al a glance, che Coun has jurisdiction and those in respect of which it has not, which is the case when th~ State party concerned has not made the optional declaralion. In this latter hypothesis, the application should be rejected de piano by simple letter by the Registry. II could eventually be communicated to the State Party concerned, but it is only if such a State accepts the jurisdiccion of U1e Court that the application could be placed on the Court's general list21 and notified to the other States Parties. The idea is lo avoid giving untimely or undue publicity to individual applications in respect of which the Court clearly lacks jurisdiction 
41. 
In this regard. it is important to point out that the potential authors of indjvidual applications may in th~ present circumstances experience difficulties knowing the situation of an African State vis-a-vis the optional declaration. Indeed, only the list or the States Parties to rhe Protocol is being published on the African Union Commission website and this list dol!s not mention lhe States that have madt: the optional declaration. ll would therefore be desirable that the list of the States Lhat have made the said declaration be similarl~ pubIished on the website for the purposes or bringing the information to the knowledge ot individuals and non governmental organizations. 

42. 
The Court, for its part. cannot be satisfied with such publication as it does not have official value, and is not a '·real lime'' renection of the status of participation in the Protocol and in t11e system of the optional declaration. To date, the list of States Parties to the Protocol and that of the States Pa11ies that have made 1he optional declaration, while being of primary interest to tJ1e Court, are not automatically notified to the Court by the Chairperson of the African Union Commission, depository of the Protocol. The Protocol does not oblige the depository to communicale declarations to the Coun Registry, its Article 34 (7) contt!nting itself with providing that declararions should be deposited with the Chairperson of the African Union Commission "who shull transmit copies thereof to the State parries". The Statute of the lnternationa I Court of Justice22 and the American Convention of Human Rights23, for their part, provide that the depositories of the optional declarations accepting the compulsory jurisdiction 


10 On dus issue, sec for example Geronl Niyungeko, La pre11ve dt!vw11 lt!s 111rid1ctions m11trna11011al<1s, Editions Bruylam. Gtlitions <lc l'Unlversitt! de Bruxcllcs, Brussels, 2005 p 55 Thus, according to the: Jnu:mataonal Court of Justice ~In accordance with its Statute and eslllbhshed JUr1sprudencc, the Court must, nonetheless, examine proprlo moll/ the issue of 1is own juris<llction in order to entertain the n:quest of the Government or Greece .. , Aegean Contmencol Shelf, Judgment, !CJ Reporl 1978 p. 7, puragn1ph 15 With regard to pructice ttl the lnlcr·Amencan Coun, see Ludovic f{ennc:bcl Ln Com'entio11 amer1ct1ine des tlrotlS <k l'Jromme -\,/Jcamsmes d, prr;)(eC/10.~ t'/ etendul' tliJ droll! ~t ltbertes f.lruyl.1111, Brussels. 2007. p. 
238. paragraph 277, or the proctice ol quus1-judiciul organs such us the Ilumon Rights Commiuec for c:xumplt:. see Ludovic Hc:nnebeJ Lo 1ur1sprudenet• du Comllr des drol/s de /'hornme ties Nnlions Umi!S le Pocte 1111em/lf1011al relotifmLr drvlts c1vfls et p1Jll1iq11tJ' .!/ SOii m1.kamsme de protec//l)n fntlividue/le, Bruylam. 13russcls, 2007 p 346 
21 As has been rightly t:mphosi.t.ed b) an author, n:gislrution of an upphc:mon on the gcnernl list of u Jud101a1 orgun ··1s in esoence a mc:ans o1 cllminuung frivolous i:orrespondcnce or other lrrelcv1mt communications that cunnot be consiu.:red t1!i 11ppl11:utlons" Carlo Santulli op cu. p. 400 
:i Article )6. paragraph 4 
1 
J Anlclc b2 parugruph :?./ 
of the International Court of Justice and the Inter-American Court, respective!}, should fik copies thereof in the Registries of thi.: said courts. Although the relevant department of the African Union Commission is not legally bound lo do so, it would also be dcsiruble that in future the said department inform the Court ofany update of the two above-mentioned lists. 
f"atsah Ouguergouz 
Aboubal-.ar Dialdle 
Regwrar 




